If it's five minutes or ten minutes, it doesn't
matter. Okay, I think now we're up to question
four. Question four. What do you feel is the best
solution to the war?
Or to peace. No, I think you've put it precisely,
and I like that. The best solution to the war...
it involves the four parties to the war and four
armies involved in the war now agreeing for the
normal political reasons on a ceasefire and some
form of power sharing wars always end in one of two
ways either one side wins and defeats the other and
that ends the war or you have some form of stalemate
and the war reaches the point where all sides or
most of the parties to realize there must be some
form of negotiated settlement and compromise and
I think without a doubt the war in Cambodia is one of
those wars that nobody's ever going to win
militarily in any decisive way and it's also a war
which can go on at its present level low intensity
level that
heavily ideologically laden expression it could
go on for a long time And it's not a question of the
war being fueled by external supplies of arms
entirely. The war will go on for a long time because
there's some serious political disputes amongst
these parties. And they will find weapons locally
if, in fact, supplies are cut off from one external
source, no doubt about it. Okay, so there has to be
some form of negotiated solution to the war.
At present, this has proved impossible. Because,
in spite of what they say, the Phnom Penh people,
the Ho Ninh Tsen government and the Hang Sơn Minh
party, backed by Vietnam, really don't want
negotiations. They still want a solution which
leaves the legitimate People's Party and the
biggest revolutionary government in power And
what they are trying to do is to bring
international opinion, public opinion, the
media, aid agencies, and Western liberal
governments around to their point of view by
campaigning against the Khmer Rouge. by
discrediting the other side by laying claims
which are cogent and credible within the
framework of our liberal tradition which will
allow them to have the government which they see to
be necessary within their strategic framework
and also just within their communist
revolutionary proletarian international way of
looking at things so they're playing tough
they're playing a very hard game They're asking
for everything. They're trying to win the war
politically by means of this
worldwide mobilization of public opinion,
trying to win the war with propaganda that they
have, in some sense, failed to win with the
invasion force and the occupation force. So the
idea is to isolate the Khmer Rouge, to isolate
Siena, to isolate the KPMG, the middle class
nationalists by political means rather than
military means. That's their strategy. And the
Paris conference failed last August. or I should
say it didn't progress very far because the
Vietnamese and the Phnom Penh people were not
prepared to negotiate very much at all. Of course
they said they're prepared to talk about this and
that, they're prepared to have international
observer forces look at this and look at that, and
verify this and verify that. But they always
wanted these mechanisms set up, or these observer
forces reporting to themselves, not to the UN, and
thereby recognizing what they call the de facto
political reality. so they're using the iron fist
if you like to continue to demand everything and in
a subtle way also to blackmail us in the West by
using the very serious plight of the people the
horrific social conditions the appalling
shocking economic realities in the country to
encourage us to say, as is said by the Oxfam people
who are in John Pilger's film to kind of give up on
the political front and say oh all right you know
we'll just feed the people we'll just recognize
you give you development you know pretend it
didn't happen pretend there never was any
patience
it is blackmail let me let me stress that the they
criticize the Thai government and the United
Nations for using refugee camps to carry on with
the war and they say the refugees in those camps are
political pawns well, they do the same thing
they're using the people inside the country and
the needs of those people inside the country as
political pawns and shoving these pawns on our TV
screens all the time and trying to persuade us to
come around to their political position So the
best solution clearly is some form of compromise,
some form of power sharing, some form of
internationally controlled ceasefire and
armistice followed by the demobilization of
substantial numbers of troops from all four
armies I mean all four not simply the Khmer Rouge
people talk about the Khmer Rouge all the time but
there are four armies here and the second
largest
force to be demobilized the central army the Phnom
Penh regime and it's very important that they be
disarmed and demobilized because the Soviets
have given them extraordinary quantities of arms
and from what I can see from what my friends in Phnom
Penh tell me that army is not a very disciplined
army and when they go into battle they take these
soviet weapons and they're huge stocks of bullets
and artillery shells and they just you know
blanket artillery carpet carpet artillery
shelling which is very destructive any
international force that goes into Cambodia has
to grab those arms depots and arms caches
everywhere a lot of weaponry in this country now
that armistice and internationally supervised
ceasefire and relocation of the troops must take
place alongside political arrangements for the
reorganization of the government of Phnom Penh
and the central administration of Phnom Penh.
political arrangements for elections and this
will likely involve so many sort of census of a
population and the establishment of an electoral
register, we would call it in Britain. People have
to register to vote and there have to be ways to be
found to ensure that everybody who is eligible is
in fact allowed to vote and that there's no
cheating, that some villages don't. have
electoral registers which gave each citizen 10
votes like the payrolls of the Mondo army exactly
and and if this isn't carefully controlled
everyone will be doing that everyone will have
stress and everyone will say the Khmer Rouge are
cheating but every Cambodian will cheat a lot of a
lot of the nasty things that are said about the
Khmer Rouge are really indicative of common
practices amongst Cambodians. But there's never
been very clean elections in Cambodia. It's the
same in most very well-known countries. So
arranging an election will be time consuming. It
will probably take governments a year to arrange
the election. But it shouldn't take more than two
years. And that's important. Things should move
right along once there is a basic agreement on an
interim political authority, international
control and supervision, a ceasefire,
demobilization,
reorganization of administration, basically to
incorporate people from the other three parties
and also to begin the process of receiving close to
700,000 Cambodians who are overseas. Let me
stress that number. Regime Phnom Penh keeps
saying, They have to keep their full
administration because there are no more skilled
people left to govern the country, and they
retrain a lot of people. well it is true that a
certain number of educated people were killed
under Pol Pot but basically again this argument is
propaganda and a pretext too for continuing to
lock out if you like all of that talent which is in
the US and France and Belgium especially in France
of course with
a couple hundred thousand Cambodians anxious to
go back home. And they were the best educated
people to begin with, and now their children have
grown up and have been well educated. So there are a
lot of skilled Cambodians in the world who could
contribute to the to the peace process and to the
reconstruction of their country and these people
simply must be allowed to come back and they cannot
come back unless there's a negotiation
politically they're denounced as dangerous
elements and all sorts of excuses are used to keep
them out unless of course now they want to do
business with Phnom Penh because going through
one of those periods of liberal reform in Phnom
Penh which is designed to make the party more
popular than it really is or make it appear to be
more popular than it than it has been. So this
problem of the repatriation of refugees in the
border camps and the repatriation of people who
settled abroad is crucial to a successful
settlement, to a settlement that will last, to a
settlement that will lead to post-war
reconstruction trying to repair the roads
rapidly and get things back in order as well as
post-war development there has to be two steps
here and the country needs every engineer every
accountant every planner every land development
expert every urban development expert that's
ever trained in that field to make and make the best
use of the international aid and reconstruction
and development money which will be forthcoming
if there is a settlement within the framework of
the Paris Conference so in a couple of sentences
the best solution to the war is a solution which is
worked out within the framework of the Paris
Conference which involves in the normal way UN
control and supervision And the worst solution is
the solution that the Vietnamese and Hong San
people kept trying to promote at Paris. August and
keep trying to sell if you like to their solution
which they call a partial solution or sometimes
they call it an external solution involves simply
a symbolic coalition between the Phnom Penh the
Cambodian People's Revolutionary Party and CNU,
or maybe CNU and the KPMG, excluding the Khmer
Rouge. This solution is no solution at all. they
say it will isolate the Khmer Rouge and the Khmer
Rouge will be finished but that's untrue that's
untrue because the Khmer Rouge represent a
certain nationalist force and the Khmer Rouge
have a certain level of support which
incidentally will remain loyal as long as the
Vietnamese are seen to be controlling things in
Phnom Penh because that is the essence of it Khmer
Rouge nationalism they are opposed to Vietnamese
colonialism in Cambodia Khmer Rouge nationalism
defends Khmer independence, Cambodian
independence and they can always rally people on
that basis privately at Paris and earlier in
Jakarta Hun Sen kept assuring Siena well if you
come over to us if you join us there will be just a
little war and we could live with it we keep them out
of pain and things will be all right But this is
utopian. This is a trick. I don't think Hun Sen got
stupid. But in Hun Sen's point of view, his current
position now is preferable to what his position
would be in a real coalition. he prefers a symbolic
coalition with Siena because that would
strengthen his position from what it is now but it
certainly wouldn't end the war it wouldn't bring
peace now let me end by saying the way you
formulated the question The beginning is more
precise.
The best solution, or the best course towards
peace, in my view, begins with ending the war. Now,
the human rights activists in Oxfam and some of the
American groups, David Hawkes can go to the
Documentation Commission for America, they
would say the way to peace is to deal with the Khmer
Rouge to maybe punish them, put them on trial,
eliminate them, discredit them, you know outlaw
them, Aksan people now talking about outlawing
the Khmer Rouge quite how one does it, I don't know,
but anyway that's what they say and in their view
this is the way to peace but it's a sort of moral,
elusive, imagined peace The best solution is,
first of all, to find ways to end the war and then you
engage in political compromise as you take into
account who has power, who has administrative
power, who has royal power, who has military power
and you put together a coalition which will allow
the country to have a government which is
different from the one that we've had before which
is not dominated by the Canary, not dominated by
the Siam, not dominated by the Huns and the people
and which is internationally supervised and
where people have in some sense to use an American
expression their heads knocked together by
international bodies now and again because there
will be conflict, there will be assassinations,
there will be trouble but it will be much less
trouble and much less dangerous for most people
than the situation that exists now which is very
dangerous